# **Lab Guide: Java Type System**

**Objectives:**

* Understand the fundamentals of the Java type system and how it relates to the
  Kotlin type system.
* Explore the differences in metadata and bytecode between Kotlin and Java classes.

**This guide must be completed without IntelliJ. Use a lightweight text editor
such as Notepad, or Visual Studio Code, or other.**

---

## **Table of Contents**

1. [Part 1: Setup](#part-1--setup)
2. [Part 2: Type Fundamentals](#part-2-type-fundamentals)
3. [Part 3: Kotlin to Java type system](#part-3-kotlin-to-java-type-system)

---

## Part 1:  Setup

1. Make sure the following command-line tools are installed and accessible from your terminal:

    * `javap` disassembler tool - [Tool Reference](https://docs.oracle.com/en/java/javase/11/tools/javap.html)

2. Create a working directory:

   ```bash
   mkdir lab02
   cd lab02
   ```

3. Create a markdown file named `lab02-responses.md` to record your answers to the questions in this lab guide.

4. At the end of this lab guide, push your work to a GitHub repository including
   the `lab02-responses.md` file and any source files you created during this lab.

---

## Part 2: Type Fundamentals

1. Create a Kotlin source file named `Person.kt` with the following content:
   `open class Person`.

2. Compile the Kotlin source file: `kotlinc Person.kt`

3. Use the `javap` tool to inspect the metadata: `javap Person.class`.  
   What is the name, kind and signature of each member of the `Person` class?

4. Use the `javap` tool to inspect the generated bytecode: `javap -c Person.class`.  
   What is the name of the class and the method invoked in the opcode `invokespecial`?

5. Create a Kotlin source file named `Student.kt` with the following content:
   `class Student : Person()`.

6. Compile the Kotlin source file: `kotlinc -cp . Student.kt`.

7. Use the `javap` tool to inspect the metadata: `javap Student.class`.

8. Use the `javap` tool to inspect the generated bytecode: `javap -c Student.class`.  
   What is the name of the class and the method invoked in the opcode `invokespecial`?

9. Change the definition of the `Student` class to `class Student : Person() { init { } }`.

10. Compile the Kotlin source file: `kotlinc -cp . Student.kt`.

11. Use the `javap` tool to inspect the generated metadata and bytecode: `javap -c Student.class`.  
    What differences do you observe in the metadata and generated bytecode
    compared to the previous version of the `Student` class?

12. Create in Java a source file named `Student.java` with the equivalent
    definition to the `Student` class in Kotlin of point 9.

13. Compile the Java source file: `javac Student.java`.

14. Use the `javap` tool to inspect the generated metadata and bytecode: `javap -c Student.class`.  
    What differences do you observe in the metadata and generated bytecode
    compared to the previous version of the `Student` class in Kotlin?

15. Given the observations (points 11 and 14) what is the difference between the generated bytecode
    of a Java class constructor and a Kotlin class initializer? Why?

16. Based on the observations regarding the bytecode generated by the Java and Kotlin `Student.class`, do you need to change your
    response to the question 3? Why?

## Part 3: Kotlin to Java type system

1. Create a Kotlin source file named `Account.kt` with the following content:
   `class Account(var balance: Long)`.

2. Compile the Kotlin source file: `kotlinc Account.kt`.

3. Use the `javap` tool to inspect the generated metadata: `javap -p Account.class`.  
   The `-p` flag is used to show private members.  
   What is the name, kind and signature of each member of the `Account` class?

4. Create a Java source file named `Account.java` with the equivalent definition
   to the `Account` class in Kotlin.  
   Confirm that the generated metadata of the Java class is equivalent to the one
   generated for the Kotlin class.

## Final Conclusion

Through this lab you should have learned:
* Kotlin compiles directly to JVM bytecode.
* Constructors and init blocks become <init> methods.
* Kotlin classes are final by default.
* Kotlin generates getters/setters automatically.
* The JVM sees Kotlin and Java classes almost identically.
* Kotlin adds extra metadata for reflection and tooling.

The differences are mainly language-level, not JVM-level.