# **Lab Guide: Kotlin to Java Type System**

**Objectives:**

* Understand the Kotlin to Java type system mapping for object declarations,
  companion objects, and function types.
* Practice writing equivalent Java code for Kotlin constructs.

**This guide must be completed without IntelliJ. Use a lightweight text editor
such as Notepad, or Visual Studio Code, or other.**

---

## **Table of Contents**

1. [Part 1: Object declarations](#part-1-object-declarations)
2. [Part 2: Companion objects](#part-2-companion-objects)
3. [Part 3: Function Types](#part-3-function-types)

## Part 1:  Object declarations

1. Copy the following code into a file named `Problems.kt` and compile it using
   the command line with `kotlinc Problems.kt`:

```kotlin
open class Problem(
    val title: String,
    val desc: String,
) {
    override fun toString(): String = "Problem(title='$title', desc='$desc')"
}

object ProblemEmailAlreadyInUse :
    Problem("Email Already In Use", "There is already a user with given email")

object ProblemUserOrPasswordAreInvalid :
    Problem("User Or Password Are Invalid", "Invalid credentials with illegal user or password.")
```

2. Which files are generated by the Kotlin compiler?

3. Which members are generated in the `ProblemEmailAlreadyInUse` class?  
   Identify each kind of member and explain its purpose.

4. Make an equivalent Java implementation of the `ProblemEmailAlreadyInUse`
   Kotlin object declaration that produces the same metadata as the Kotlin
   version.  
   Your `ProblemEmailAlreadyInUse` Java class should extend the existing
   `Problem` class created from the `Problem` Kotlin class declaration.

5. Use the `javap -p -c` to verify that the generated class file is similar to
   that one produced by the Kotlin compiler.

6. Confirm that `System.out.println(ProblemEmailAlreadyInUse.INSTANCE);` prints:
   > Problem(title='Email Already In Use', desc='There is already a user with given email')

   Note that you must run this example using the `kotlin` command line tool, not `java`,
   since your code depends on the `Problem` class generated by the Kotlin compiler.  
   Otherwise using `java` you will need to include the kotlin standard library in the classpath.



## Part 2: Companion objects

```kotlin
class Dice {
    // Every Dice instance uses the same random number from the companion
    val lastRoll: Int = sharedRandom.nextInt(1, 7)

    companion object {
        // Shared Random instance
        val sharedRandom = java.util.Random()
    }
}
```

1. Copy the above code into a file named `Dice.kt` and compile it using the
   command line with `kotlinc Dice.kt`.

2. Which class files are generated by the Kotlin compiler?

3. Which members are generated in each of the generated class files?  
   Identify each kind of member and explain its purpose.

4. How in Java would you access the `sharedRandom` property of the `Dice` companion object?

## Part 3: Function Types


```kotlin
fun cross(source: Iterable<Any>, transform: (Any) -> Int): Iterable<Int> {
    return source.map {
        println("Crossing $it")
        transform(it)
    }
}

fun main() {
    cross(listOf("ola", "isel", "super")) { it.toString().length }
        .forEach(::println)
}
```

1. Copy the above code into a file named `Utils.kt` and compile it using the
   command line with `kotlinc Utils.kt`.
   **Try to predict the output of the program before executing it**.  
   Execute the program using `kotlin UtilsKt` and confirm that the output
   matches your expectations.

2. Analyze each part of the Kotlin source code identifying each lambda in use.

3. Analyze the metadata of `UtilsKt` using `javap -p UtilsKt.class` and identify what is the
   type of the `transform` parameter in the `cross` method?

4. Analyze and register the metadata of the type of the `transform` parameter
   using the next command, replacing `<Type of transform parameter>` with the
   actual type identified in the previous step.  
   **Note** that you will need to include the kotlin standard library in the
   classpath when running `javap`.  
   You can use the following command, replacing `<full path>` with the actual
   path to your `kotlin-stdlib.jar` file:
```
javap -cp '.:<full path>/kotlin-stdlib.jar' <Type of transform parameter>
```
or for windows:
```
javap -cp ".;<full path>\kotlin-stdlib.jar" <Type of transform parameter>
```

5. Analyze the metadata of the `UtilsKt.class` using `javap -p UtilsKt.class`
   and identify what is the member resulting from the lambda expression used in
   the `main` function.

6. **Add** the next usage of the `cross` function in the `main` function,
```kotlin
cross(listOf(true, false, true)) {
      if (it == true) 1 else 0
   }
   .forEach(::println)
```

7. Compile and execute the program again and confirm that the output matches your expectations.

8. Analyze the metadata of the `UtilsKt.class` again using `javap -p UtilsKt.class`
   and identify what is the member resulting from the new lambda expression used in
   the `main` function.

9. Note that the anonymous functions resulting from the lambda expressions used
   in the `main` function are generated as static members of the `UtilsKt`
   class.  
   **Note** these members are not accessible to the Kotlin or Java source code
   directly, but they are used by the `cross` function when it is called with a
   lambda expression as argument. Even so, you can use reflection to access
   these members and invoke them directly.  
   For example, you can use the next code snippet to access the member resulting
   from the first lambda expression used in the `main` function, which is the
   one that transforms a string into its length.  
   Calling the `funLength` through reflection, e.g. with `funLength.invoke(null,
   "test")` should return `4`.  
   This confirms that the `funLength` **represents** the function resulting from
   the first lambda expression used in the `main` function, which transforms a
   string into its length.

```kotlin
// Replace <Name of first lambda> with the actual name of the member resulting 
// from the first lambda expression.
//
val funLength = Class
   .forName("UtilsKt")
   .getDeclaredMethod("<Name of first lambda>", Any::class.java) 
   .apply { isAccessible = true }
```

10. Build another code snippet to access the member resulting from the second
    lambda expression used in the `main` function, which is the one that
    transforms a boolean into an integer.  
    